The Play of Illusion

An Autobiography

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Incomparable gurus, protectors of beings,most gracious ones, I bow down at your lotus feet,as
devotion fills my body, speech and mind.Now I shall relate the false tale of my life.

The land where I, the wicked one, was bornis the area known as the four land knots.There, in
a region called Rekhé,on the banks of a golden river,is the place called Ajam.

My father was compassionate,unparalleled in kindness, a vidyādharaknown as Gyurme Tsewang Gyatso.


His ancestors included Gyalse Pema Namgyal,a descendent in the family line of Düdul.[1]Blessed
by his secret body, speech and mindwas the great treasure-revealing vidyādhara,Nüden Namkhai
Naljor,whose son became my father.

My mother, called Tsultrim Tso,was born into the family of a siddhaknown as the renunciant of
Amdo’s Ser Valley,in the lineage of Achak Dru.

I was born as their son in the female Water Snake year—during the autumn months, I heard it
said.My parents had little concern for such things,so they left no written recordof the planets
and stars, or dreams and signs.

I was raised and trained in a gradual manner.When I reached my sixth year or thereabouts,my
maternal uncle, Lama Gelek,began teaching me to read.I thus learnt the thirty basic consonants
and affixed signs,as well as the maṇḍala and seven branches from Embodiment of Realization.On
one occasion, I receiveda longevity empowerment from Drakmar Yizhin Wangyal,[2]and
thereby forged a dharmic connection.

In my seventh year, the great Situ Paṇḍitasent a welcoming partyto invite me to Katok Monastery.We
arrived at Katok, the glorious and unsurpassable,on a winter’s day just as snow was
falling—a positive sign of auspicious connection.I stayed there in the residence of Longsal,Dzong-ngo
Tashi Khangsar.

On an auspicious day, the lord of refugeperformed the hair-cutting ceremonybefore the statue
of Buddha known as Lhachen Palbar—‘The Great Deity Blazing with Splendour’,and gave me the
name Jamyang Lodrö Gyatso.

Not longer afterwards, I began to studywith my gracious tutor Tupten Rigdzin Gyatsoat Bartrö
Chöling.

When I went to Horpo, I experienced boundless misery and hardshipon account of my youth.I met
the king and queen of Lingkar[3]and explained the Gangloma praise[4] from memory.

As they remembered their guru,the royal couple wept in devotion.Ever since we have been connectedas
benefactor and beneficiary,with pure, unsullied samaya and great faith and affection.


Around this time my gracious tutor taught me to writeand instructed me in the preliminary practices
(ngöndro).He explained The Lamp of Speech, Thirty Verses and Application of Gender
twice,as well as the Introduction to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life and Treasury of Precious
Qualities,the Sārasvatavyākaraṇa commentary on Sanskrit grammar and instructions on the
generation phase (bskyed rim).He taught them all in a simple way that was easy to comprehend.


He also encouraged me to explain The Lamp of Speech to others,bestowed the reading transmission
for Getse Paṇchen’s writings,and taught me various aspects of ritual in precise detail.


When I think back now on how he guided me in everything,beginning with how to eat and dressAnd
all the various points of conduct—what to do and what not to do—I'm moved to the point
of tears.Care for me with compassion until I attain awakening!Whatever qualities I now possessare
due solely to this great being’s compassionate care.

At this time, I also received from the omniscient lord of refuge,[5]extensive empowerments and
transmissionsfor the Eight Deities (Kagyé), Gathering of Intentions Sūtra, Nyingma Kama,Four-Part
Heart-Essence, Peaceful and Wrathful Ones and more,but since I was unable to keep
a record,the details are not entirely clear.

Together with Situ Paṇchen,I received from Sherab, the previous Khyentse’s ritual master,transmissions
for the collected works of the Sakya patriarchs,as well as the writings of Tsele,
and more besides.

The all-seeing one acted as preceptor,and together with the master of ceremony (karmācārya)
Rigdzin Gyatso,before a gathering of the saṅgha,he graciously bestowed on me the novice vowsand
the name Tsuklak Lungrik Nyima Mawé Sengé.

Ever since, I have avoided the four root downfalls and other transgressions,and I will continue
to avoid them until this physical support eventually transforms.

I received all the empowerments for the revelations of Longsal Nyingpo and Düdul Dorjedirectly
from the master,while Zhingkyong Jewön gave the corresponding reading transmissions.At
around the same time, I also received from this same master [i.e., Zhingkyong Jewön],the transmission
for the two volumes of Khyentse’s miscellaneous writings,a text authorization
for the protector Gaṇapati,the transmission of The Ocean of Dharma that Combines all Teachings
and Maṇi Kabum,and the empowerment of Cultivating the Pure Realm of Manifest Joy.Through
these and other transmissions, we made multiple dharmic connections.This was a master
who paid special attention to those of lower statusand cared for everyone with a parental
kindness.

I participated in several major offering ritualsat Katok during this period, both in summer
and winter.

In my tenth year, I participated in the rainy season retreatand was examined before the assemblyon
various aspects of what had been taught.

In my eleventh year, I studied drawingand the Sārasvatavyākaraṇa commentary with my tutor.Around
this time, I went collecting grains in the area around the Nyakchu river,and in early
summer I went to Tromkhok and elsewhere to collect dairy products.

Then, in my twelfth year, for three months,I studied the five collections of astronomical calculations
traced in sand.I repeated what the teacher said and learned to calculate using
my fingers,but didn’t understand [the underlying principles] in the slightest.

In the assembly hall at Katok I attended the Pure Land practiceand, to everyone’s apparent astonishment,explained
the Sukhāvatī aspiration.

When travelling to Tromkhok, at the Druk encampment,I beheld the golden countenance of Natsok
Rangdrol,[6]the great vidyādhara master of incomparable kindness.He expressed praise based
on his pure vision,bestowed a longevity empowerment and gave me a generous offering.I met
him many times during this periodand received ripening empowerments and liberating instructions
for Gongpa Zangtal and Longchen Nyingtik,as well as the Lama Yangtik and the master’s
own revelations.He also gave me Dzogchen instructions related to Trekchö and Tögal,pointing
out instructions and brought about enhancement.He was immensely kind in both dharmic
and worldly terms.

In my thirteenth year, my gracious tutor passed to a pure realm,and left me stranded like a
child alone in the desertor a blind person lost and without a guide.

For three years my noble tutor suffered continuously with phlegmatic sickness.Throughout this
time, I put aside my own concerns and served as his attendant.Tirelessly, I made tea, fetched
water, nursed him and so on.All of which, I believe, helped to purify some of my obscurations.


After the forty-nine days, when the Vajradhara went to Dralak Monasteryhe brought me with him
as his attendant.In the breaks I memorized the Guhyagarbha,and went around nomadic areas
to collect supplies.

Having returned, I memorized the root text of the Ornament of Clear Realization (Abhisamayālaṃkāra).That
winter I acted as regent during the Gathered Great Assembly (tshogs chen ’dus
pa),and, entering the tantric college,I received a vast number of teachings, includingthe
Ganggi Lodröma praise of Mañjuśrī,Praise of the Buddha’s Superiority, More Exalted than the
Gods,Analysis of the Five Aggregates, Introduction to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life,the
Three Sets of Vows, Treasury of Precious Qualities, Wish-Fulfilling Treasury,Introduction
to Scholarship, Ornament of Clear Realization, the two Distinguishings,the Sublime Continuum,
Ornament of Mahāyāna Sūtras (Sūtrālaṃkāra), Ornament of the Middle Way (Madhyamakālaṃkāra)
and more,from Situ Paṇchen, Khenpo Kunpal,Tenzang, Aka and others.

The great khenpo Lama Kunzang Palden Chödrak was especially kind and caringat this time, in
explaining the difficult points of texts,through which I developed a basic understanding of
our inherited tradition.

Also in my fourteenth year I studied the textual tradition,and on occasion joined the assembly
to receive empowerments and transmissions,observe the rainy season retreat, and so on.


During my fifteenth year, the incarnation from Dzongsardeparted for another realm,[7]and, according
to the final testament of our predecessor’s ailing nephew,[8]as transmitted to Lord
Situ,I, a sack of squandered offerings, had to move to the main seat.

Everyone left me and, all alone,I had to take charge independently.As a result of past negative
karma,some were unfriendly and hostile toward me.But through the discipline of avoiding
arrogance,I ensured that the seat was not lost.By adopting an attitude of great loving kindness,I
pacified hostility and won people’s hearts.

In accordance with the Lord of Refuge’s instructions,I exerted myself in studies with Khenpo
Kalzang Wangchukon those texts of Maitreya that I had not yet received,as well as Treasury
of Abhidharma, Root Verses of the Middle Way, Introduction to the Middle Way,and Verse Summary
of the Perfection of Wisdom.

At this time, I taught around twenty monks of Dzongsar MonasteryIntroduction to the Bodhisattva’s
Way of Life, the three sets of vows, Verse Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom,Sublime
Continuum and The Prayer of Good Actions.

In the Earth Bird year, I went to visit Loter Wangpo,the Vajradhara lord merely to think of
whom dispels the heart’s anguish.Delightedly, he invited me to sit upon a thronebedecked with
cushions of the finest brocade.Through the force of past karmic connection,I felt tremendous
respect and ardent devotion toward him.Before long, from both the Varjadhara himselfand
Tashi of Drakra I began to receivethe major empowerments of the Compendium of Tantras.The
great lord of buddha families also bestowed a great many instructionson Parting from
the Four Attachments and The Seven Points [of Mind Training].He began with the generation
of bodhicitta according to the Middle Way traditionand the general maṇḍala of the three families,and,
in all, I received many major empowerments.

I received the complete instruction of the Path with Its Fruit for Disciplesand an elaboration
explanation of the Hevajra Tantra.When explaining the view of the indivisibility of saṃsāra
and nirvāṇaaccording to the causal continuum of the universal ground, during the teachings
for discipleshe spent seven days on the pointing out instructions based on searching
for the mind.I thus gained a partial understanding of the essence of mind.The great Vajradhara
also held the profound ultimate lineageof experiential guidance, the heart instructions
of Nyoshul Lungtok Tenpé Nyima.

I was asked to explain the Seven Points [of Mind Training] to a group of aspiring practitionerswhen
Khenchen Shenpen Rinpoche was doing a major recap of the tantra teachings.I also took
responsibility for going over the first half of The Tree of General Tantra Classifications.That
master scholar also explained the Fundamental Vinaya Summary.Tartse Khenchen could
not come,so, once the yoga tantra section was complete,I received the Hundred Transmissions
of Mitra (Mitra Gyatsa) and Seven Ngor Maṇḍalas,the major Bhairava empowerments of the
Ra and Tsarpa traditions,as well as a triple instruction based on Ngawang Chödrak’s guide
to Path with Its Fruit from Tashi Gyatso.

The transmission of the Collection of Tantras was delayed and, all in all, lasted about seven
months.Although my noble father, the great vidyādhara,had arrived to transmit the Treasury
of Revelations,I had been deliberating which was the more important.Eventually, I excused
myself with great concern that he had stayed at Dzongsar for so long,and, missing the deities
and guru, I returned to my place at Tashi Lhatse.

Beginning on an astrologically auspicious dayin the month of miracles in the Iron Dog year,my
father conferred the series of major empowerments,including the Great Assembly, Emptying
the Depths of Hell,and the whole of the New Treasures of Chokling.For eight months in total,
he bestowed empowerments and transmissions.

Noble guru whose kindness is beyond measure,from now until I reach the essence of awakening,O
guru whose kindness is immeasurable,to you I shall continually make offerings.

In the Iron Pig, I received all the ripening empowerments and liberating instructionsfor the
Compendium of Sādhanas from the king of Vajradharas,Khenchen Samten Lodrö, as well as the
reading transmission for Khecarī, and more.

That same year my noble father, the vidyādhara,passed beyond and went to the realm of Lotus
Light.I made abundant cloud-like offerings to fulfil his intentions.

For more than four months in the Water Mouse year,I received a great many empowerments from
the Compendium of Tantras,from the Highest Yoga section onwards,from Tartse Zhabdrung Rinpoche
Jampa Kunzang Tenpai Nyima of Wara Monastery.This master was unrivalled in his qualities
of learning, discipline and benevolence,and the fact that he was unable to live long was
deeply regrettable and a source of much distress.

From Kunzang Palden Chödrak, I received explanatory guidance on the Pramāṇavārttika,a commentary
on the Kālacakra Tantra and more.

The lord of scholars Tashi Chöpel demonstrated his incredible kindness many times,by granting
me the Golden Dharmas of the Shangpa, Kālacakra and so on.

When I reached my twenty-fifth year, I went to tame the valley of Gonjo.[9]As this demonstrates,
although I had returned to my seat,I still took many trips in summer and winter to collect
income.

Not allowing the gifts of the faithful to go to waste,I established centres of study and practice,and
arranged for the writings of my predecessorto be published in more than thirteen
volumes.[10]Together with the three volumes of the Khecarī collection,the commentary on the
Gathering of Intentions Sūtra and ṭikka for the Guhyagarbha,more than two volumes of Mipham’s
writing,and other major texts and commentaries from sūtra and mantra,I have sponsored
the printing of many volumes over the years.

In the Earth Horse, when I was twenty-five,I established the great dharma teaching centreof
Shedrup Dargye Ling,[11]and through the magnanimous aspirations of Khenchen Shenpen Jampé
Gocha,[12]it has continued without decline until the present.In this way, I was of some slight
benefit to the teachings.

That same year, while there was a medicine consecration at Pukgön MonasteryI went to Rudam Samten
Chöling [i.e., Dzogchen Monastery].There, from Losal [i.e., Khenpo Jigme Pema Losal],
who possesses the most excellent qualities of discipline and learning,I received full ordination.However,
the auspicious conditions were only moderate.

It was during the Kagye medicine consecration at Pukgön Monasterythat I first beheld the golden
visage of the Vajradhara Shechen Gyaltsab,and received from him the Gathering of the Innermost
Essence long-life initiation.He was extraordinarily kind to me.

After that he came to Dzongsar, where he stayed for a long timeand bestowed many rare empowerments
and transmissionsfrom the ancient terma tradition, including the Northern Treasures.

In the Earth Monkey year,[13] Gyaltsab Rinpochegave several empowerments and transmissions from
the Mindroling tradition.He fell sick and I offered prayers for his longevity.

I went to the Do encampment in the north,and met the omniscient Tenpe Nyima.He kindly bestowed
the empowerments of Assembly of Vidyādharas (Rigdzin Düpa) and The Sealed Quintessence
Guru Sādhana (Ladrup Tiklé Gyachen),gave me instructions on Longchen Nyingtik,and taught the
overview of the Guhyagarbha.He constantly offered guidance and advice.He gave me permission
to transmit his writingseven without having received the oral transmission,and looked
after me with immense kindness.

I met Lerab Lingpa and received ripening empowerments and liberating instructionsfrom the Vajrakīla
cycle and the Essence of Liberation (grol thig).[14]

In the Wood Mouse year,[15] when I was thirty-one,at Tashi Demchok Ling hermitageat the great
Dharma centre of Shechen,the lord of the maṇḍala with the name of Padma[i.e., Shechen Gyaltsab.]remained
upon the lion throneand in this excellent gathering of teacher and assemblygranted
instructions for texts,together with empowerments and supporting instructions,related
to the eight great chariots of the practice lineagefrom Treasury of Precious Instructions
(Damngak Dzö),as well as ripening empowerment and liberating instructionsfor the teachings
with restriction seals from Treasury of Terma Revelations.

This lord of refuge, the wish-fulfilling jewel,cared for me with great kindness on both a worldly
and spiritual level.He was an incomparable treasury of compassion.

From Pema Drimé LodröI received the transmission for Kunzang Namgyal’s writings[16]and the two
systems of Nyingtik[17] as well as the empowerments for the Great Assembly,and more besides—a
vast number of teachings and empowerments in all.

The retreat centre of Dragang, established by the former Dharma-king of Derge,had fallen into
disrepair.I provided the retreatants with a stipendof more than a hundred dri and thirty
pieces of silver each,and rebuilt their retreat cells.I also established retreat places for
the aural lineagefocussing mainly on the practice of the Path with Its Fruit.

Then, in the region of Khyungpo,I was invited by the government official Wangnor,and forged
a dharmic connectionthrough the empowerments of the Four-Part Heart-Essence and so on.

In the Wood Ox year I went on pilgrimage to Lhasa,[18]and prostrated myself and made offerings
before the Jowo Śākyamuni.I made prayers of aspiration to my satisfaction,and beheld the
signs and marks of the Gyalwang Tupten Gyatso.[19]As a dharmic connection, I received teachings
on Lamp for the Path of Awakening,and offered earnest prayers for his longevity.

In keeping with the biography of my predecessor,I went to the great dharma centre of Mindrolling,to
take the vows of full ordination againfrom Ngawang Tupten Norbu.

One month that year I travelled to Khyungpo.On the way I met Neten Chokling and Tsikey Tulku
Rinpoche,from whom I received several empowerments and teachingsincluding the New Treasures
of Chokling.

In the year of the Water Ox[20]I, the unfortunate one,received the terrible news that the great
omniscient Situ,merely to think of whom dispels the miseries of existence and quiescence,Had
passed away.I said prayers and made offerings for the fulfilment of his intentions.for
many years thereafter, I encountered him again in dreams.

Although you, my protector, have passed into the absolute sphere,You continue, I am sure, to
care for me with love.And constantly I feel a sorrow that is tinged with joy.

On the orders of the minister Mentö,[21]I travelled to Jampa Ling in Chamdoand there performed
a rite for averting Yama,as well as the practice of the sthaviras, and so on.I also offered
empowerment and ritual ablution to the ministerand an explanatory reading transmission
of the Treasury of Dharmadhātu (Chöying Dzö).

Around this time, I received several major empowermentsfrom the lord of scholars, Geshe Jampal
Rolwe Lodrö,[22]including the great empowerment of Guhyasamāja.at the very top of the Yamāntaka
temple.He created the auspicious conditions for my long lifethrough the longevity
practice of Cakrasaṃvara.

After returning to my own place,I sent my regards and a greeting scarfto Shechen, for Kyabje
Gyaltsab Rinpoche.In his handwritten response, he wrote:“Now the mahāpaṇḍita Katok Situ has
passed away,and I too am an old man close to death.The oil in the lamp of the Nyingma teachings
is all but spent,so it is right for you to summon your courageand prepare yourself
to serve the teachings.”This was to be his final message.He passed into the absolute sphere
shortly afterwards.

I travelled to perform the fulfilment of his intentions,and one night while staying in Pawok,
I met the master in a dream.Until the end of the third week I made cloud-like offeringsand
prayed repeatedly for the fulfilment of his intentions.I also performed the cremation and
so on.

From the great khenpo Kunzang Palden,[23]I received instruction on generating bodhicitta according
to the Introduction to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life.Then, returning to my own place,
I immediately went into retreat.

After the retreat, I went to glorious Katok.and oversaw elaborate repairs to the study college,where
we added new sacred imagery.Then, with my own resources and whatever was leftover,we
built a temple to house a great buddha statue,both the external structure and sacred objects
within.

The Fifth Dzogchen Rinpoche had passed away,and when his tulku appeared, I officiated at the
enthronement,performing the offering of praise and so on,without any agenda based on self-interest.


At around the time of my fifteenth year,I went to be of service to the teachings at Katok.In
my free time during that period,I performed many approach and accomplishment recitations,including
the major approach recitation for Hevajra.

At the feet of Gatön Lekpa,[24]sovereign of all holders of the aural lineage, Dharma Lord and
Vajradhara,I received an explanation of the profound private instructionsof the Path with
Its Fruit according to the oral tradition, complete with the four valid criteria,as well
as Khecarī, Yamāntaka, Mahākāla and so on—many profound ripening empowerments and liberating
instructions from the oral lineage.He was extremely kind and entrusted me with his wisdom
intent.

The precious guru of incomparable kindnessestablished a new tradition elaborate Kīla practice
at Dzongsar,and erected many supports of enlightened body, speech and mind,as well as establishing
a little retreat centre at Taktsang.At some point, I performed many great accomplishment
(drupchen) practices,and, in accordance with the vision of the all-seeing Situ,helped
to popularize the great ‘Hundred Million Maṇi Mantra’ practicethroughout the neighbouring
regions,where it became a basis for happiness and wellbeing.

I will now detail some other Dharma connectionsI made at various times through the speech of
great masters.

I received many empowerments and teachingsfrom the great khenpo Gyaltsen Özer.[25]From Tertön
Drimé Özer,[26]I received the great empowerment of The Collected Realization of the Yidam
Deities,as well as the tertön’s own Yamāntaka collection and more.With these empowerments
and by eliminating obstacles,he enveloped me in tremendous kindness.

From Raktrul Tupten Shedrup[27]I received all the empowerments and transmissions for the Sky
Teachings (Namchö),as well as Ratna Lingpa’s revelations, and much more.

The great khenpo Ngawang Palzang[28]granted me the empowerments and transmissions of Longsal
Nyingpo and Dudül Dorje’s revelations,as well as the great empowerment of the Eight Great
Deities: The Complete Secret,and empowerments and transmissions for the Innermost Essence
of the Ḍākinī (Khandro Yangtik), and so on.He thus cared for me with immense kindness.

From the lord of scholars Lekshe Jorden,I received the transmissions for Jigme Lingpa’s writings
and Jatsön Nyingpo’s treasures,as well as the compiled rituals for the Kama tradition.


From Zurmang Trungpa Rinpoche,[29]I received instructions and empowerments from the aural lineage
of Cakrasaṃvara,the Vastly Expansive View of Dorje Lingpa,and instruction on the six
yogas and Mahāmudrā.

From the Chokling incarnation at Neten Monastery,I received the two Heart Practice (Tukdrup)
sādhanas from the New Treasures,as well as the Three Sections of the Great Perfection.

From Kela Tulku RinpocheI received the major empowerment of the Heart Practice: Spontaneous
Fulfilment of Wishes (Tukdrup Sampa Lhundrup),the transmission of Life-Force Practice of the
Vidyādharas (Rigdzin Sokdrup) and more.

I received several empowerments and transmissions from Dabzang Tulku Rinpoche,including the
empowerment of Vajravārāhī, the nine deities of Jinasāgara,Khyentse’s Jinasāgara and so on.


From the incarnation of Terchen Rolpé Dorje,[30]I received all Rolpe Dorje’s treasure teachings.


From Palpung Jamgön Situ[31]I received the bodhisattva vow according to the lineage of vast
conduct,the major empowerment of Hevajra,and many other teachings, including White Tārā.

From the reincarnation of Kongtrul at Tsadra,I received the empowerments for Ratna Lingpa’s
Vajrakīla,the Yangdak terma revelation of Kongtrul the Great, and more.

From Shechen Rabjam Rinpoche,I received the brief empowerment of Nyang’s Krodhakālī,and many
other empowerments including Yamāntaka: Vanquisher of Haughty Spirits.

From Katok Kunzang Tendzin,I received an explanatory reading transmission for the General Scripture
that Gathers All Intentions,as well as teachings on the Trilogy of Finding Rest, Treasury
of the Supreme Vehicle,and many other texts.

From Pema Tukje Wangchuk,[32]I received the collected treasures of Lerab Lingpa,and the empowerments
and transmissions for the two Dongtruk cycles in the Nyingma Kama.[33]

I also made many dharma connectionswith Sangye Nyenpa, Tralek Choktrul,Tenzang, Khargo Tulku
and others.

When I was young, I receivedthe major empowerment of The Heart Practice for the Spontaneous
Fulfilment of Wishesand a reading transmission for the Pema Kathang from Terse Tsewang Norbu.


From the supreme tulku Tashi Paljor,[34]I received many transmissions including the empowerment
for the Tantra System Kīla (Gyüluk Purba),and many empowerments and reading transmissions
for the master’s own mind terma,as well as the reading transmission for the Treasury of
Kagyü Mantrasand the collected works of Jonangpa Tāranātha.

Drikung Tertön Ösel Dorje dispelled obstacles to my life,and bestowed a Tārā empowerment from
his own terma revelations,as well as a long-life empowerment.In such ways, we forged a dharmic
connection over time.Although he was an authentic treasure-revealer,his beneficial
activity was weak on account of his stubborn character.

From the great spiritual friend Jamgyal,[35]I received the Cause and Path Hevajra and Nairātmyā
empowerments,an explanatory reading transmission for The Path with Its Fruit: Private
Explanation for Disciples,and more besides—a vast array of nectar-like Dharma.He extended
great affection and kindness towards me.

Dezhung Choktrul Rinpoche,[36]the sole ornament of the Ngor tradition of Sakya teachings,granted
me authorization blessings for The Ocean of Sādhanas,the body maṇḍala of Drilbupa’s Cakrasaṃvara,
Khecarī Vajrayoginī,and several other crucial ripening empowerments and liberating
instructions.

From Zimwog Choktrul, I received the profound Cause and Path Hevajra empowerments,and all the
empowerments and instructions of the Four-Faced Mahākāla.

I did not meet Drubwang Śākya Śrījñāna in person,but we communicated by letter.He extended great
compassion toward me,and I felt the blessings of his realization, sparking the power
of awareness.

From his heart-son Pakchok Dorje,[37]I received the empowerment for Guru Cakrasaṃvara and much
else.

Although I barely had the fortune to meet the Fifteenth Gyalwang Karmapa,I did encounter him
in dreams.Still, I beheld the radiant visage of his incarnation, the Sixteenth, Rigpé Dorje.With
great faith and devotion, I witnessedthe great liberation-upon-seeing hat ceremony,and
imbibed the nectar of his enlightened speech.

From the vajra-holder Bodhibhadra,I received empowerments and instructionsfor Akṣobhya, Hevajra
and Khecarī Vajrayoginī.

From the hidden yogin Tenpel,I received empowerments, authorization and profound instructionsfor
the Aural Lineage of Thangtong Gyalpo and Pañjaranātha,Khecarī Vajrayoginī, and so on.


Ewam Thartse Khenchen,[38].Granted me the Cause and Path empowerments for Hevajra,and the blessings
for the profound path.

Khenchen Dönpal granted me the empowerment for Amitāyus and Hayagrīva combined.Luding Gyalse
Rinpoche[39]gave me the authorization blessing for the Three White Deities.and from Dordzin
Palden JamyangI received the major empowerment of Cakrasaṃvara from the Luipa tradition,and
all the ripening empowerments and liberating instructions for Four-Faced Mahākāla.

From Jamyang Khyenrab Tayé,[40]I received the great empowerment of Kālacakra,and reading transmissions
for Vajrabhairava and Four-Faced Mahākāla.

From Tharlam Tulku Rinpoche[41]I received the reading transmissionof the writings of the Sakya
Patriarchs, Ngorchen and Zhuchen.From Tsangsar Tulku I received the major empowerments
for the upper and lower rites of Kīla,and the cycles of Mahākāla, Vaiśravana and so on.

From Namkha Kunzang Tenpe Gyaltsen,[42]I received empowerments and authorization blessingsfor
the nine-deity Amitāyus and the Tiger Rider.From Shar Lama Könchok Tendzin I receivedall
the authorization blessings and detailed instructions for Pañjaranātha,and the authorization
blessing for White Tārā Radiating Six Rays of Light.

In short, by relying on more than eighty teachers,I received a vast array of sacred Dharma.


Beginning in my forty-eighth year, I was afflictedwith a severe condition that lasted several
years.Through the compassion of the guru and Three JewelsI managed to remain alive.

Due to my heavy obscurations from evil karma and misuse of funds,I have not had any visions
of the Three Root deities,experiences of receiving teachings from them and the like,so there
is nothing whatsoever to write down.

My diligence is weak and my intelligence slight.I retain only a little with mediocre understanding.Had
I been trained in the principles of logic,I believe I might have become flawless
in debate,but there is little point in that.

I was able to memorize Chanting the Names of Mañjuśrī,as well as the sādhanas of the Three Rootsand
Magön Chamdral from Longchen Nyingtik,in addition to several recitations for assembly
practice in the Ngor tradition,having chanted them only two or three times.I believe this
was due to positive habitual traces from past lives.

When memorizing the Vajravidāraṇa dhāraṇīone evening, as I gazed at the moon,I felt intense
sadness and repeatedly recalledthe great dharma centre of glorious Sakya,and how I had been
born in the Khön familyIn a previous life—a fleeting memory based on habitual traces.

On occasion I have also had fragmentary recollectionsof Ngari Paṇchen, the great Lhatsün,Ngawang
Lobzang Gyatso,Tsangyang Gyatso, Palri Khyentse[43] and others.These were my own wild
imaginingsbased on excessive pride,as it would clearly be unreasonablefor such sublime masters
as theseto take birth as one so wicked as I.

When I was young I had a dreamin which I was cared for by the mantra protectress.I reported
this to the lord of the maṇḍala,who said I should recite Longsal Nyingpo’s mantra protectress.


Thangtong Gyalpo introduced me to the nature of pure awarenesswith the support of a crystal.In
dreams I met the noble elder Aṅgaja,as well as Vimalamitra and Longchenpa.I received long-life
empowerment from Khyentse Wangpoand an explanatory transmission of the Longchen Nyingtik
preliminariesfrom the great bodhisattva Patrul.

Nubchen Sangye Yeshe gave me the entrustmentsfor many tantric works.I had dreams and experiences
of receiving blessingsfrom several lamas from the Path with Its Fruit lineage,as well
as Milarepa, Sakya Paṇḍita, Tsongkhapa,and Lhatsün Namkha Jigme,who showed me the indications
for mantra conduct.I couldn’t tell whether these were real or false;they were like confused
blurs.And because I did not cling to self,I don’t recall them in precise detail.

Although I wished to practise approach and accomplishmentfor the Three Root deities of the new
and old schools and kama and terma traditions,as desperately as someone afflicted with
thirst would yearn for water,still I have been overwhelmed by the eight worldly concerns.


I have managed the following, more or less:

While young, I practised the praise to Mañjuśrī,and recited it for about a month,but was mostly
lost in distraction.

I accumulated 300,000 recitations of White Mañjuśrīand 500,000 approach mantras for Sarasvatī,but
this involved a lot of thinking and very little application of the key points.

I did the daily recitation for Ratna Lingpa’s Secret Sādhana of Vajrakīla,White Vajravārāhī
from Koṅkadatta’s tradition,and the mind treasure, Illuminating Wisdom (Prajñālokakṛtya).[44]

I also completed the recitations for wrathful Takhyung Barwa, Siṃhamukhā,the Sealed Quintessence
(Tiklé Gyachen) guru practice and Vajrakīla.

I twice practised the Enhancer of Longevity Four-Faced Mahākāla.I did the hundred thousand accumulations
of the Longchen Nyingtik preliminaries,but could not complete more than 40,000
prostrations.

I practised the major approach for Hevajra elaborately,Bhūtaḍāmara, Mitra’s [White] Amitāyus
according to both Kama and Terma,the Secret-Essence (Sangtik) Kīla twice,the Aural Transmission
(Nyengyü) Kīla,both Vajrakīla and Yamāntaka from the Clear Light Heart-Essence (Ösal
Nyingtik),the Chokling Kīla: The Wrathful King in Whom All Power is Gathered,Longsal Nyingpo’s
Vajrapāṇi and Yellow Jambhala,Düdul Dorje’s Secret Practice of Kīla and Palchen Düpa,the
extensive recitation for the Tantra System Mañjuśrī,Dorje Drolö from the Sangwa Gyachen,Karma
Guru, White Tārā,and Extracting the Vital Essences,Makzor, Long-life Practice General
Maṇḍala of the Three Families,Lama Sangdü and Könchok Chidü,Barche Kunsel, Sampa Lhundrup,and
Tārā who Dispels Obstacles,Tārā, Vajrapāṇī and Ucchuṣma,Nyang’s Gathering of Sugatas,
Gathering of Eight Deities (Kagyé),and the Yamantaka from the Aural Transmission twice.


I have also practised the Vanquisher of Opponents (Parol Goljom) twice,Vijaya from the Bari
tradition,the Heart-Essence of Deathless Ārya Tāra (Chimé Pakmé Nyingtik) three times,the
Vimalamitra guru sādhana Heart of Blessings,and the Immaculate Sage twice.

I have practised the Red Amitāyus heart practice and Red Kiṃkara,the ‘further averting’ practice
from the Essence of Liberation, Nāgarakṣa,White Tārā from Atiśa’s tradition and from
Zhikpo Lingpa,White Tārā from the Longchen Nyingtik and the Bari tradition twice,the White
Six-Armed protector,Vajrasattva from the Mindrolling tradition, the Wrathful Red Deity (Drakmar),Dorje
Drolö from the Heart Practice,Dorje Drakdzongma, guardian of Pañjaranātha, three
times,and I recited the seven syllables of Pañjaranāthaaround eight million times.

I believe that this form of Mahākālahas always looked upon me with compassion.When restoring
the protector temple at Dzing Namgyal monastery,at the time of dispersing obstacles during
the consecration,through the force of sharpening the power of awarenessthe statue of the
deity actually shook,as I and several others witnessed.

I accumulated two million recitations of Sakya Kīla,and practised the Vidyādhara Heir of the
Victorious Ones (Gyalwe Dungdzin) from the Heart Practice,as well as Guru: Lion of Speech
from Padampa’s tradition,Lion of Speech, the daily practice for the entire maṇḍalaof Gathering
of the Ḍākinīs’ Secrets (Khandro Sangdü),and pacifying, enriching and magnetizing Vajravārāhī
practices.

I also practised Pacifying Torment from the Essence of Liberation,Kurukullā from the Sakya tradition,
Khecarī,the two systems of Thangtong Gyalpo’s long-life practice,the guru yoga of
Six-Armed Blue Mahākāla,the secret practice of glorious Four-Faced Mahākāla,and ten thousand
recitations of Sitātapatrā.

Guru yoga based on the three long-life deities,[45]Kyergang’s Hayagrīva, Multi-Coloured Garuḍa,
Black Mañjuśrī,Vajrapāṇi in Utsarya and Blue-Clad (Nīlāmbaradhara) forms,Sakya’s combined
form of Mañjuśrī, [46]Samantaśrī’s Sarasvatī,Brahmin Kīla’s tradition of Sarasvatī,Bhikṣaparama’s
secret practice of Red Sarasvatī,Ucchuṣma in Atiśa’s tradition,Dispelling the
Faults of Samaya Defilements (Damdrip Nyepa Kunsel) from the Essence of Liberation tradition,White
Acala, the main deity Green Tārā from Sūryagupta’s tradition,Red Jambhala, the Seven-Gur
long-life practice of Four-Faced Mahākāla,the long-life practice of the Queen of Adepts,and
the long-life practice of Kurava.

I also practised Nyang’s Krodhikālī,Khyentse’s Blazing Vajra Fire Vajrapāṇi,the Hayagrīva practice
of the aural transmission ofFive Antidotal Deities,the Heart-Essence of Supreme Hayagrīva's
Play,Hayagrīva who Liberates Haughty Spirits, Fire-Wheel of Meteoric Iron,Pacifying
Sitātapatrā, the Great Peahen (Mahāmāyūrī),Nyang’s treasure White Four-Armed Protector
Who Enhances Life,Rongzom’s Lotus Ḍākinī,Wrathful Guru with the Lower Part as a Dagger from
the Sky Teachings (Namchö),Guru Sādhana from the Quintessence of the Ḍākinīs,and the long-life
practice called The Iron Tree.

I practised the Ling treasure of the long-life consort (tseyum)and Khyentse’s Caṇḍālī twice.I
also completed the approach and accomplishment recitationsfor Chokling’s Siṃhamukhā of Vimalamitra,Guru
Chöwang’s White Tārā and so on.

All this was done as in the statement,“With a mind that is distracted,however much you recite,
it will bear no fruit.”I did not gain even so much as a sign of common accomplishment.


Still, as long as death does not catch up with me,I shall practise a little more approach and
accomplishment.So that I might gain accomplishment in this way—Lord of Oḍḍiyāna, grant me
inspiration and blessings, I pray!

I do not possess the ten requisite qualitiesof an outer or inner vajra master.Nor have I practised
the approach recitationfor the great tantra classes on a vast scale.Still, with arrogant
presumptuousness,and in response to requests, I have taken on the burden of being a
guru.

Thus, I have given the Treasury of Instructions (Damngak Dzö) three times, the Compendium of
Sādhanas four times,the empowerments and reading transmissions of the great Treasury of Terma
Revelations,and the private instructions for the Path with Its Fruit once,the public
instructions twice, teachings on the Hevajra Tantra three times,explanatory transmission of
the root tantras of Gur and Sampuṭa,and with great effort, I twice receivedthe explanation
as taught in Khyentse’s close lineage.

I taught the Seven Maṇḍalas of Ngor three times,the maṇḍala of the Purification of All Evil
Destinies (Sarvadurgatipariśodhana) three times,I taught the Jonang and Zhalu intepretations
of Kālacakra six times,and Mipham’s commentary on the tantra once.I also transmitted the
Cakrasaṃvara according to Luipa’s and Nagpopa’s traditions many times,and the aural lineage
of Cakrasaṃvara once.

I gave the empowerment and reading transmission for Khecarī Vajrayoginī many timesand the reading
transmission for the collected rituals (be’u bum) twice.I conferred the collected works
of the Sakya patriarchs and Ngorchen once,and the empowerments and reading transmission
of Pañjaranātha and Four-Faced Mahākāla twice.I gave the textual transmission of Bhairava
onceand the empowerments several times.

I gave the reading transmission for the Great Stages of the Path (Lamrim Chenmo) once,for the
Nyingma Kama twice,and for the Nyingma Tantra Collection once.

I gave the major texts from the Kama—Guhyagarbha, the General Scripture,and the Root Fragment
tantra [of Vajrakīla]—four times and the ripening empowermentsfor the section with restriction
seals from the Treasury of Precious Termas three timesand the reading transmission
twice.I transmitted the Four-Part Heart-Essence three times,and the two Quintessences twice.


I gave the reading transmission for the Seven Treasuries twice,and explained the Trilogy of
Finding Rest many times.I gave the major empowerment of Lama Gongdü twice,and the major Kagyé
empowerment the same number of times.I transmitted Gongpa Zangthal twice,and Thangtong
Nyengyü three times.

I gave the Sealed pure visions [of the Fifth Dalai Lama]and the Mindrolling Treasures three
or four times each.

I have given the Excellent Wish-Granting Vase (Döjo Bumzang) twice,and the reading transmission
for the writings of Minling Terchen and Tsele Natsok Rangdrol once each.I gave the empowerments
and reading transmissions for the revelations of Düdul Dorje and Longsal Nyingpo
twice and the ripening empowerments and liberating instructionsfor the Longchen Nyingtik
many times,as well as teaching on the Treasury of Precious Qualities three times.

I bestowed the entire terma collection of Khyentse Wangpoand the reading transmission for his
writings twice.And I transmitted the entire New Treasures of Chokling twice as well.

In short, in response to various requests,and according to people’s wishes, I have offered an
uninterrupted streamof Dharma teachings, empowerments, authorizations, blessings and instructions.


My predecessor, the Jamgön Lama,had a maternal care for all traditions,and understood their
own unique systemsof tantra, commentary and pith instruction, without ever conflating them.


He did not spoil traditions by combining them,but taught all disciples according to their needs.Thus,
all schools—Sakya, Gelug, Kagyü and Nyingma—cherished him as one of their own gurus.


Although I am not of similar calibre,still I have cultivated pure perception extensivelytowards
all the eight great chariots of Tibet,and remain untainted by the veil of false ideas,while
also avoiding disparagement and sectarian bias.

I pray that whatever traditions of empowerment, instruction and reading transmission remain,I
may, with great effort,receive them all, now and in the future!

Whatever I have received with the noble intentionthat the teachings may endure long into the
future,may I be able to pass on without sectarian prejudice,and may I abandon all criticism
and jealousyand contempt for beings, irrespective of their status.

Thus, with the wish to benefit all,an intention as pure as a white conch or lotus root,I generated
bodhicitta and made positive prayers of aspiration.May all the connections I have made
be meaningful.

This is the essence of my life of liberation.

Now that I have reached the age of fifty-six—half-a-century plus the sense enjoyments and a
rhino horn,[47]although I lack even the tiniest attributeof a treasure-revealer or adept,if,
for the time being, I continue to survive,it is possible that as I try to secure my own
interest,I might also be of some slight benefit to others.

Therefore, in accordance with indirect statementsfrom the all-seeing lord, my predecessor,as
well as the prophecies of great beings,including some words of the great Jamgön Kongtrul,and
that which arose to my own mind,circumstances came about whereby I took a consort for
long-life practice.

I gave back my basic vehicle vows of individual liberation,and now I may not gain the realization
on which they depend.Still, with bodhicitta I persist in virtuous action.Although I
cannot promise that this will prove beneficial,as long as I do not fall prey to inner or outer
conditions,for a while at least, it is possible that I shall survive.

With the great burden of negativity I have accumulated,the infallible laws of cause and effect
prescribethat I must experience suffering as a result.Thus, I call out to the compassionate
protectors:Please look kindly upon this wretched oneAnd lead him out of misery’s mire!


Infractions of the major and minor rulesof the three sets of vows shower down like rain,and
I am stained by natural misdeeds as well.With deep and heartfelt regret, I recalland confess
these faults: purify them all, I pray!

I lack the confidence to delight in death,and however much of this human life remains,may I
devote it all to Dharma practice.In particular, through the altruistic mind of bodhicitta,as
stable as the king of mountains,may I fulfil the wishes of all beingsand secure their genuine
welfare!

Whatever remains unfulfilled in the aspirations and activityof the all-seeing protector Jamyang
Khyentse,that great and precious treasury of wisdom and love,may I be the one to accomplish
it all!

May I and all who are connected with me,even those who have merely heard my name,purify all
karma, afflictions, misdeeds and obscurations,and take birth miraculously in the heart of
a lotusin the western pureland of Sukhāvatī.There, may we attain the prophecy of awakening,traverse
the five paths and ten stages,and gain the four kāyas of omniscience!

Thus, I offer this rough summaryof my own past deeds,in which I conceal my flawsand exaggerate
my qualities.

I wrote this brief accountas I could not turn down the requestof the all-seeing supreme tulku,the
precious Tashi Paljor,with whom I have been connected in past livesthrough the force
of a common aspiration.

Thus, this old fool and wanderer, who has abandoned both kinds of pursuit,[48]the so-called
Chökyi Lodrö—Dharmic Intelligence,spontaneously wrote down whatever came to mind.May the virtue
of this be a cause of progress toward liberationin all those who have a positive or
negative connection!

(I made a few additions when devoted students were preparing to carve the woodblocks.)

May virtue abound! Sarva maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey 2019, with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and
Terton Sogyal Trust and the kind assistance of Alak Zenkar Rinpoche and Dr Lodrö Puntsok.